Update the module lifecycle document to also cover plugins and collections (#74413)
ansible/ansible: docs/docsite/rst/dev_guide/module_lifecycle.rst

.. _module_lifecycle:

********************************************
The lifecycle of an Ansible module or plugin
********************************************

Modules and plugins in the main Ansible repository have a defined life cycle, from first introduction to final removal. The module and plugin life cycle is tied to the `Ansible release cycle <release_cycle>`.
A module or plugin may move through these four states:

> 1. When a module or plugin is first accepted into Ansible, we consider it in tech preview and will mark it as such in the documentation.

Reviewer: Does this depend on the old ANSIBLE_METADATA to mark it as tech preview? because I don't think that's used anymore (at least not in collections... not sure about ansible/ansible).

Author: Yep, that's the part. I think it's also no longer used in ansible/ansible, but as I wrote:

> (It does not remove the part on 'preview'/'stable' in the lifecycle part, which should also be removed/updated/rewritten. Would be glad if someone else can tackle that part :-) )

> 2. If a module or plugin matures, we will remove the 'preview' mark in the documentation. We support (though we cannot guarantee) backwards compatibility for these modules and plugins, which means their parameters should be maintained with stable meanings.

Reviewer: again, not sure this is happening anymore. The old 'Status' section of the module docs doesn't show up after Ansible 2.9. I don't see status in `ansible-doc` output either.

Author: I tried to only minimally modify the first section, since I think it needs a major overhaul and I'm not sure what it should say...

3. Reference the deprecation in the relevant ``porting_guide_core_x.y.rst``.
4. Add ``deprecated:`` to the documentation with the following sub-values:

  :removed_in: A ``string``, such as ``"2.10"``; the version of Ansible where the module will be replaced with a docs-only module stub. Usually current release +4. Mutually exclusive with :removed_by_date:.
  :remove_by_date: (Added in ansible-base 2.10). An ISO 8601 formatted date when the module will be removed. Usually 2 years from the date the module is deprecated. Mutually exclusive with :removed_in:.
  :why: Optional string that used to detail why this has been removed.
  :alternative: Inform users they should do instead, for example, ``Use M(whatmoduletouseinstead) instead.``.

* For an example of documenting deprecation, see this `PR that deprecates multiple modules <https://github.com/ansible/ansible/pull/43781/files>`_.
  Some of the elements in the PR might now be out of date.

Deprecating modules and plugins in a collection
===============================================

To deprecate a module in a collection, you must:

> 1. Add a ``deprecation`` entry to ``plugin_routing`` in ``meta/runtime.yml``. For example, to deprecate the module ``old_cloud``, add::

Reviewer: Sorry to bug, but can you change these to code-blocks? These rst pages get translated and the translation engine can detect and ignore code-blocks but not something like these.

Author: I tried to update them. I'm not 100% sure about the indentation of the code-blocks inside the enumerations.

.. _module_lifecycle:

********************************************
The lifecycle of an Ansible module or plugin
********************************************

> Modules and plugins in the main Ansible repository have a defined life cycle, from first introduction to final removal. The module and plugin life cycle is tied to the `Ansible release cycle <release_cycle>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Modules and plugins in the main Ansible repository have a defined life cycle, from the first introduction to final removal. The module and plugin lifecycle is tied to the `Ansible release cycle <release_cycle>`.
```

> A module or plugin may move through these four states:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A module or plugin may move through these four stages:
```

> 1. When a module or plugin is first accepted into Ansible, we consider it in tech preview and will mark it as such in the documentation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. When a module or plugin is first accepted into Ansible, is considered as tech preview and will mark it as such in the documentation.
```

Author: Shouldn't it be `it is considered` and not `is considered`?

Reviewer 3: I prefer active voice when possible. But does the progression from "tech preview" to "stable" even happen any more in the collections ecosystem?

Reviewer 2: From my understanding, the progression from "tech preview" to "stable" happens in a different way. Like "community.aws" is tech preview when some module matures it is promoted to "amazon.aws" (stable).

Author: But right now, there's no way to mark it in a uniform way. (I guess https://github.com/ansible/ansible/pull/73707 will allow, but that is only available for ansible-core 2.12, and not for 2.11 and 2.10.)

Author: @acozine @Akasurde how should we proceed here? I'm for keeping that part as-is in this PR. This whole section needs to be rewritten anyway, but since it is not clear what it should say, I would really prefer not to open that can of worms here :)

> 2. If a module or plugin matures, we will remove the 'preview' mark in the documentation. We support (though we cannot guarantee) backwards compatibility for these modules and plugins, which means their parameters should be maintained with stable meanings.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. If a module or plugin matures, the 'preview' mark in the documentation is removed. Backward compatibility for these modules and plugins is maintained but not guaranteed, which means their parameters should be maintained with stable meanings.
```

> 3. If a module's or plugin's target API changes radically, or if someone creates a better implementation of its functionality, we may mark it deprecated. Modules and plugins that are deprecated are still available but they are reaching the end of their life cycle. We retain deprecated modules and plugins for 4 release cycles with deprecation warnings to help users update playbooks and roles that use them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. If a module's or plugin's target API changes radically, or if someone creates a better implementation of its functionality, it can be marked as deprecated. Modules and plugins that are deprecated are still available but are reaching the end of their lifecycle. Deprecated modules and plugins for 4 release cycles with deprecation warnings to help users update playbooks and roles that use them.
```

Author: I think there's an `are retained` missing in the last sentence.

Reviewer 3: Here too, our [style guide](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/dev_guide/style_guide/index.html#stylistic-cheat-sheet) calls for active voice. This change would introduce passive voice. Do you have a strong preference @Akasurde? If so, what's your thinking?

Reviewer 2: I don't have a strong opinion on passive voice.

> 4. When a module or plguin has been deprecated for four release cycles, we remove the code and replace it with a tombstone entry in the routing configuration. Modules and plugins that are removed are no longer shipped with Ansible. The tombstone entry helps users find alternative modules and plugins.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. When a module or plugin has been deprecated for four release cycles, it is removed and replaced with a tombstone entry in the routing configuration. Modules and plugins that are removed are no longer shipped with Ansible. The tombstone entry helps users find alternative modules and plugins.
```

For modules and plugins in collections, the lifecycle is similar. Since ansible-base 2.10, it is no longer possible to mark modules as 'preview' or 'stable'.

.. _deprecating_modules:

Deprecating modules and plugins in the Ansible main repository
==============================================================

To deprecate a module in ansible-core, you must:

1. Rename the file so it starts with an ``_``, for example, rename ``old_cloud.py`` to ``_old_cloud.py``. This keeps the module available and marks it as deprecated on the module index pages.

> 2. Mention the deprecation in the relevant changelog (create a changelog fragment with a section ``deprecated_features``).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Mention the deprecation in the relevant changelog (by creating a changelog fragment with a section ``deprecated_features``).
```

  :remove_by_date: (Added in ansible-base 2.10). An ISO 8601 formatted date when the module will be removed. Usually 2 years from the date the module is deprecated. Mutually exclusive with :removed_in:.
  :why: Optional string that used to detail why this has been removed.
  :alternative: Inform users they should do instead, for example, ``Use M(whatmoduletouseinstead) instead.``.

* For an example of documenting deprecation, see this `PR that deprecates multiple modules <https://github.com/ansible/ansible/pull/43781/files>`_.
  Some of the elements in the PR might now be out of date.

Deprecating modules and plugins in a collection
===============================================

To deprecate a module in a collection, you must:

1. Add a ``deprecation`` entry to ``plugin_routing`` in ``meta/runtime.yml``. For example, to deprecate the module ``old_cloud``, add:

   .. code-block:: yaml

       plugin_routing:
           modules:
               old_cloud:
                   deprecation:
                       removal_version: 2.0.0

>                        warning_text: Use foo.bar.new_cloud instead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                       warning_text: Use M(foo.bar.new_cloud) instead.
```

   For other plugin types, you have to replace ``modules:`` with ``<plugin_type>:``, for example ``lookup:`` for lookup plugins.

   Instead of ``removal_version``, you can also use ``removal_date`` with an ISO 8601 formatted date after which the module will be removed in a new major version of the collection.

> 2. Mention the deprecation in the relevant changelog. If the collection uses antsibull-changelog, create a changelog fragment with a section ``deprecated_features``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Mention the deprecation in the relevant changelog. If the collection uses ``antsibull-changelog``, create a changelog fragment with a section ``deprecated_features``.
```

    EXAMPLES = '''
    ln -s stat.py _fileinfo.py
    ansible -m stat -a "path=/tmp" localhost
    ansible -m fileinfo -a "path=/tmp" localhost
    '''

Renaming a module or plugin in a collection, or redirecting a module or plugin to another collection
====================================================================================================

To rename a module or plugin in a collection, or to redirect a module or plugin to another collection, you need to add a ``redirect`` entry to ``plugin_routing`` in ``meta/runtime.yml``. For example, to redirect the module ``old_cloud`` to ``foo.bar.new_cloud``, add:

.. code-block:: yaml

    plugin_routing:
        modules:
            old_cloud:
                redirect: foo.bar.new_cloud

If you want to deprecate the old name, add a ``deprecation:`` entry (see above):

.. code-block:: yaml

    plugin_routing:
        modules:
            old_cloud:
                redirect: foo.bar.new_cloud
                deprecation:
                    removal_version: 2.0.0
                    warning_text: Use foo.bar.new_cloud instead.

> You need to use the FQCN of the new module/plugin name, even if it is located in the same collection as the redirect. By using a FQCN from another collection, you redirect the module/plugin to that collection.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You need to use the Full Qualified Collection Name (FQCN) of the new module/plugin name, even if it is located in the same collection as the redirect. By using a FQCN from another collection, you redirect the module/plugin to that collection.
```

Author: Isn't it "Full**y**"?

Reviewer 3: yes, it's "Fully"

Reviewer 2: yes, I meant "Fully"

Author: ```suggestion
You need to use the Fully Qualified Collection Name (FQCN) of the new module/plugin name, even if it is located in the same collection as the redirect. By using a FQCN from another collection, you redirect the module/plugin to that collection.
```

Author: (Since I cannot edit your suggestion I have to add new ones...)

> If you need to support Ansible 2.9, please note that Ansible 2.9 does not know about ``meta/runtime.yml``. With Ansible 2.9 you can still rename plugins and modules inside one collection by using symbolic links. Note that ansible-base 2.10, ansible-core 2.11 and newer will prefer ``meta/runtime.yml`` entries over symbolic links.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you need to support Ansible 2.9, please note that Ansible 2.9 does not know about ``meta/runtime.yml``. With Ansible 2.9 you can still rename plugins and modules inside one collection by using symbolic links. Note that ansible-base 2.10, ansible-core 2.11, and newer will prefer ``meta/runtime.yml`` entries over symbolic links.
```

Tombstoning a module or plugin in a collection
==============================================

To remove a deprecated module or plugin from a collection, you need to tombstone it:

> 1. Remove the module or plugin file with related files like tests and documentation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Remove the module or plugin file with related files like tests, document references, and documentation.
```

Author: document**ation**?

Reviewer 2: +1

Author: ```suggestion
1. Remove the module or plugin file with related files like tests, documentation references, and documentation.
```
